\input texinfo
@setfilename tlisp.info
@settitle T-Lisp Language and API Reference
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en

@copying
This manual is the T-Lisp Language and API Reference for tmax (version 0.2.0).

Copyright @copyright{} 2024 tmax contributors.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title T-Lisp Reference Manual
@subtitle Language and API Reference for tmax
@author tmax contributors
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top T-Lisp Reference

This manual documents the T-Lisp language and the complete editor API
for tmax, the extensible terminal-based text editor.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::              What is T-Lisp
* Lexical Structure::         Comments, identifiers, literals
* Data Types::                Numbers, strings, symbols, lists, booleans, nil
* Evaluation::                How expressions are evaluated
* Special Forms::             quote, if, let, lambda, defun, defmacro, etc.
* Quasiquote System::         Template quoting with unquote
* Standard Library::          Built-in functions
* Macro System::              Defining and using macros
* Tail Call Optimization::    Writing efficient recursive functions
* Editor API --- Buffer::     Buffer manipulation functions
* Editor API --- Cursor::     Cursor position and movement
* Editor API --- Text Editing:: Delete, yank, change, paste
* Editor API --- Search::     Search and replace operations
* Editor API --- Visual::     Visual selection operations
* Editor API --- Text Objects:: Structured text objects
* Editor API --- Kill Ring::  Clipboard history operations
* Editor API --- Undo/Redo::  Undo and redo operations
* Editor API --- Modes::      Editor mode operations
* Editor API --- Files::      File system operations
* Editor API --- Key Bindings:: Key binding and command execution
* Editor API --- Minibuffer:: Minibuffer operations
* Editor API --- Hooks::      Hook system operations
* Editor API --- Loading::    load, provide, require, and load-path
* Editor API --- Syntax::     Syntax highlighting operations
* Editor API --- Major Modes:: Major mode operations
* Editor API --- Minor Modes:: Minor mode operations
* Editor API --- Plugins::    Plugin system operations
* Editor API --- Windows::    Window management operations
* Editor API --- Registers::  Register operations
* Editor API --- LSP::        LSP diagnostics operations
* Editor API --- Navigation:: Word, line, jump, page navigation
* Editor API --- Count Prefix:: Count prefix operations
* Editor API --- Dired::      Directory editor operations
* Editor API --- Replace::    Replace operations
* Editor API --- Indent::     Indentation operations
* Editor API --- Miscellaneous:: message, messages-buffer, documentation
* Testing Framework::         T-Lisp testing functions
* Index::                     Function and concept index
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex T-Lisp
@cindex introduction

T-Lisp (tmax Lisp) is a Lisp-1 dialect embedded in the tmax terminal text editor.
It provides all editor extensibility through a comprehensive API.

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Lisp-1 dialect} --- variables and functions share the same namespace
@item @strong{Lexical scoping} --- variables are scoped to their defining block
@item @strong{Tail-call optimization} --- recursive calls in tail position use constant stack
@item @strong{Macro system} --- full quasiquote support for metaprogramming
@item @strong{200+ editor API functions} --- complete control over the editor
@item @strong{Testing framework} --- built-in test definitions and assertions
@end itemize

@node Lexical Structure
@chapter Lexical Structure

@cindex lexical structure
@cindex comments
@cindex identifiers

@section Comments

Comments begin with @code{;} and extend to end of line:

@example
;; This is a comment
(+ 1 2) ; inline comment
@end example

@section Identifiers

Identifiers may contain letters, digits, and: @code{-}, @code{_}, @code{?}, @code{!}, @code{+}, @code{*}, @code{/}, @code{<}, @code{>}, @code{=}

@example
x  my-variable  buffer-insert  nil?  set!  +  <=
@end example

@section String Literals

Double-quoted with escape sequences:

@example
"hello world"
"Line 1\nLine 2"
"Say \"hello\""
@end example

@section Number Literals

@example
42    -17    3.14    -2.5
@end example

@section Special Tokens

@table @code
@item ( )
Parentheses delimit lists and function calls
@item '
Quote --- shorthand for @code{(quote ...)}
@item `
Quasiquote --- template quotation
@item ,
Unquote --- evaluate within quasiquote
@item @code{,@@}
Unquote-splice --- splice list elements within quasiquote
@end table

@node Data Types
@chapter Data Types

@cindex data types

@table @code
@item Numbers
Integers and floating-point: @code{42}, @code{-17}, @code{3.14}

@item Strings
Text in double quotes: @code{"hello"}, @code{"file.txt"}

@item Symbols
Identifiers that name variables: @code{x}, @code{buffer-insert}

@item Lists
Ordered collections: @code{'(1 2 3)}, @code{(list 1 2 3)}

@item Booleans
@code{#t} (true), @code{#f} (false)

@item Nil
Empty list / false: @code{nil} or @code{'()}

@item Hash Maps
Key-value stores: @code{(hashmap "key" "value")}

@item Functions
Created with @code{lambda} or @code{defun}

@item Macros
Created with @code{defmacro}
@end table

@node Evaluation
@chapter Evaluation

@cindex evaluation

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Self-evaluating}: numbers, strings, booleans, nil evaluate to themselves
@item @strong{Symbols}: looked up in the current environment chain
@item @strong{Lists}: first element is the function, remaining elements are evaluated as arguments
@item @strong{Special forms}: @code{if}, @code{let}, @code{lambda}, etc.---evaluated with custom rules
@end itemize

@example
(+ 1 2 3)         ; function call => 6
(if (> x 0) x 0)  ; special form
(let ((x 10)) x)   ; special form => 10
@end example

@node Special Forms
@chapter Special Forms

@cindex special forms

@deffn Special Form quote expr
Return @var{expr} without evaluating it.
@example
(quote x)    ; => x
'(1 2 3)     ; => (1 2 3)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form if condition then-expr else-expr
Evaluate @var{condition}. If truthy, evaluate and return @var{then-expr}; otherwise evaluate and return @var{else-expr}.
@example
(if (> 3 2) "yes" "no")  ; => "yes"
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form let bindings body...
Create local variable bindings. @var{bindings} is a list of @code{(name value)} pairs.
@example
(let ((x 10) (y 20))
  (+ x y))  ; => 30
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form lambda params docstring? body...
Create an anonymous function. Optional @var{docstring} after @var{params}.
@example
(lambda (x) (* x x))
(funcall (lambda (x y) (+ x y)) 3 4)  ; => 7
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form defun name params docstring? body...
Define a named function in the current environment.
@example
(defun square (x)
  (* x x))
(square 5)  ; => 25
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form defmacro name params body...
Define a macro. The body is evaluated at expansion time, not call time.
@example
(defmacro when (condition . body)
  `(if ,condition (progn ,@@body)))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form progn expr...
Evaluate each expression in sequence. Return the value of the last.
@example
(progn
  (buffer-insert "Hello")
  (cursor-move 0 0))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form cond clause...
Multi-way conditional. Each clause is @code{(condition expr)}. Use @code{t} as condition for else.
@example
(cond
  ((< x 0) "negative")
  ((= x 0) "zero")
  (t "positive"))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form defvar name value
Define a variable in the global environment.
@example
(defvar tab-width 4)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form set! name value
Set an existing variable's value.
@example
(set! tab-width 2)
@end example
@end deffn

@node Quasiquote System
@chapter Quasiquote System

@cindex quasiquote
@cindex unquote
@cindex macro

@deffn Special Form quasiquote expr @code{`}
Template quotation --- like @code{quote} but allows selective evaluation.
@example
`(a b c)              ; => (a b c)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form unquote expr @code{,}
Evaluate @var{expr} within a quasiquote.
@example
(let ((x 42))
  `(the answer is ,x))  ; => (the answer is 42)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Special Form unquote-splicing expr @code{,@@}
Splice list elements into the enclosing quasiquote.
@example
(let ((nums '(1 2 3)))
  `(before ,@@nums after))  ; => (before 1 2 3 after)
@end example
@end deffn

@node Standard Library
@chapter Standard Library

@cindex standard library

@section Arithmetic

@deffn Function + numbers...
Addition. With no arguments returns 0.
@example
(+)          ; => 0
(+ 5)        ; => 5
(+ 1 2 3)    ; => 6
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function - numbers...
Subtraction. With one argument, negation.
@example
(- 5)        ; => -5
(- 10 3)     ; => 7
(- 20 5 2)   ; => 13
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function * numbers...
Multiplication. With no arguments returns 1.
@example
(*)          ; => 1
(* 3 4)      ; => 12
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function / numbers...
Division. With one argument, reciprocal.
@example
(/ 2)        ; => 0.5
(/ 10 2)     ; => 5
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function mod dividend divisor
Modulo operation.
@example
(mod 7 3)    ; => 1
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function abs number
Absolute value.
@example
(abs -5)     ; => 5
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function min numbers...
Minimum of arguments.
@example
(min 3 1 4 1 5)  ; => 1
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function max numbers...
Maximum of arguments.
@example
(max 3 1 4 1 5)  ; => 5
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function sqrt number
Square root.
@example
(sqrt 16)    ; => 4
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function expt base exponent
Exponentiation.
@example
(expt 2 10)  ; => 1024
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function floor number
Round down to integer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function ceiling number
Round up to integer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function round number
Round to nearest integer.
@end deffn

@section Comparison

@deffn Function = a b
Numeric equality.
@example
(= 3 3)      ; => #t
(= 1 2)      ; => #f
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function < a b
Less than.
@example
(< 1 2)      ; => #t
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function > a b
Greater than.
@example
(> 3 2)      ; => #t
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function eq a b
Object identity comparison.
@end deffn

@section List Operations

@deffn Function cons elem list
Prepend @var{elem} to @var{list}.
@example
(cons 1 '(2 3))  ; => (1 2 3)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function car list
First element of @var{list}.
@example
(car '(1 2 3))   ; => 1
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function cdr list
Rest of @var{list} after first element.
@example
(cdr '(1 2 3))   ; => (2 3)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function list elements...
Create a list from arguments.
@example
(list 1 2 3)     ; => (1 2 3)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function append lists...
Concatenate lists.
@example
(append '(1 2) '(3 4))  ; => (1 2 3 4)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function reverse list
Reverse a list.
@example
(reverse '(1 2 3))  ; => (3 2 1)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function nth n list
Get @var{n}th element (0-indexed).
@example
(nth 0 '(a b c))  ; => a
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function last list
Get last element.
@example
(last '(1 2 3))   ; => 3
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function member item list
Find @var{item} in @var{list}; return tail from match or nil.
@end deffn

@deffn Function length string-or-list
Length of string or list.
@example
(length "hello")  ; => 5
(length '(1 2 3)) ; => 3
@end example
@end deffn

@section String Operations

@deffn Function substring str start end
Extract substring from @var{start} to @var{end}.
@example
(substring "hello" 1 4)  ; => "ell"
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function string-append strings...
Concatenate strings.
@example
(string-append "hello" " " "world")  ; => "hello world"
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function string= a b
String equality.
@end deffn

@deffn Function string< a b
String less-than (lexicographic).
@end deffn

@deffn Function string> a b
String greater-than (lexicographic).
@end deffn

@deffn Function string-upcase str
Convert to uppercase.
@end deffn

@deffn Function string-downcase str
Convert to lowercase.
@end deffn

@section Type Predicates

@deffn Function null expr
Test if @var{expr} is nil or empty list.
@end deffn

@deffn Function atom expr
Test if @var{expr} is not a list.
@end deffn

@deffn Function numberp expr
Test if @var{expr} is a number.
@end deffn

@deffn Function stringp expr
Test if @var{expr} is a string.
@end deffn

@deffn Function symbolp expr
Test if @var{expr} is a symbol.
@end deffn

@deffn Function listp expr
Test if @var{expr} is a list.
@end deffn

@deffn Function functionp expr
Test if @var{expr} is a function.
@end deffn

@deffn Function zerop number
Test if @var{number} is zero.
@end deffn

@deffn Function evenp number
Test if @var{number} is even.
@end deffn

@deffn Function oddp number
Test if @var{number} is odd.
@end deffn

@section Logical

@deffn Function not expr
Logical negation. Returns @code{#t} if @var{expr} is falsy.
@end deffn

@section I/O

@deffn Function print args...
Print arguments to stdout.
@end deffn

@section Hash Maps

@deffn Function hashmap key1 value1 key2 value2...
Create a hash map from key-value pairs.
@example
(hashmap "name" "tmax" "version" "0.2")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function hashmap-get map key
Get value for @var{key} from @var{map}. Returns nil if not found.
@end deffn

@deffn Function hashmap-set map key value
Return new map with @var{key} set to @var{value} (immutable).
@end deffn

@deffn Function hashmap-keys map
Return list of all keys.
@end deffn

@deffn Function hashmap-values map
Return list of all values.
@end deffn

@deffn Function hashmap-has-key? map key
Test if @var{map} contains @var{key}.
@end deffn

@section Keymaps

@deffn Function defkeymap name
Create and define a new keymap.
@end deffn

@deffn Function keymap-get keymap property
Get a property from a keymap.
@end deffn

@deffn Function keymap-define-key keymap key command
Bind @var{key} to @var{command} in @var{keymap}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function keymap-lookup keymap key
Look up binding for @var{key} in @var{keymap}.
@end deffn

@section Variables

@deffn Function setq name value
Set variable @var{name} to @var{value} in the global environment.
@example
(setq tab-width 4)
@end example
@end deffn

@node Macro System
@chapter Macro System

@cindex macros
@cindex defmacro

Macros transform code at expansion time. They receive unevaluated arguments
and produce new code to be evaluated.

@example
(defmacro when (condition . body)
  `(if ,condition (progn ,@@body)))

(when (> x 0)
  (print "positive")
  (print x))
;; Expands to: (if (> x 0) (progn (print "positive") (print x)))
@end example

Key points:
@itemize @bullet
@item Macro arguments are @strong{not} evaluated before the macro runs
@item The macro body produces a new expression (the @strong{expansion})
@item The expansion is then evaluated in the calling environment
@item Use quasiquote (@code{`}) with unquote (@code{,}) and splice (@code{,@@}) to build expansions
@end itemize

@node Tail Call Optimization
@chapter Tail Call Optimization

@cindex tail call optimization
@cindex TCO

T-Lisp optimizes recursive calls in tail position to use constant stack space.
A call is in tail position when it is the last thing a function does.

@example
;; Tail-recursive factorial
(defun factorial (n acc)
  (if (<= n 1)
      acc
      (factorial (- n 1) (* n acc))))

(defun fact (n)
  (factorial n 1))

(fact 100)  ; Works without stack overflow
@end example

The recursive call to @code{factorial} is in tail position because it is the
result of the @code{if} expression in the else branch.

@node Editor API --- Buffer
@chapter Editor API --- Buffer

@cindex buffer operations
@cindex buffer API

@deffn Function buffer-create name
Create a new buffer named @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-switch name
Switch to buffer @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-current
Return name of current buffer, or nil.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-list
Return list of all buffer names.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-text
Return entire buffer content as string.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-line @var{lineNum}
Return content of line @var{lineNum}. If omitted, returns current line.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-lines
Return list of all lines in current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-line-count
Return number of lines in current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-insert text
Insert @var{text} at cursor position and advance cursor.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-delete count
Delete @var{count} characters at cursor. Returns deleted text.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-filename
Return filename of current buffer, or nil.
@end deffn

@deffn Function set-buffer-filename path
Set filename for current buffer to @var{path}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-modified-p
Return @code{#t} if buffer has unsaved changes.
@end deffn

@deffn Function set-buffer-modified-p flag
Set modified flag to @var{flag}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-get-line-indent lineNum
Return indentation level (number of spaces) of line @var{lineNum}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-set-line-indent lineNum column
Set indentation of line @var{lineNum} to @var{column} spaces.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-previous-non-blank-line lineNum
Find previous non-blank line number from @var{lineNum}. Returns -1 if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-line-matches lineNum pattern
Test if line @var{lineNum} matches regex @var{pattern}.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Cursor
@chapter Editor API --- Cursor

@cindex cursor operations

@deffn Function cursor-position
Return current cursor position as @code{(line column)} list.
@example
(cursor-position)  ; => (5 10)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function cursor-move line column
Move cursor to @var{line} and @var{column} (0-indexed).
@end deffn

@deffn Function cursor-line
Return current cursor line number (0-indexed).
@end deffn

@deffn Function cursor-column
Return current cursor column number (0-indexed).
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Text Editing
@chapter Editor API --- Text Editing

@cindex delete
@cindex yank
@cindex change
@cindex paste

@section Delete Operations

@deffn Function delete-word count
Delete @var{count} words from cursor (dw).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-to-line-end
Delete from cursor to end of line (d$).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-line count
Delete current line and @var{count}-1 lines below (dd).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-to-sentence-end
Delete from cursor to end of sentence (d)).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-register-get
Get content of the delete register.
@end deffn

@section Yank (Copy) Operations

@deffn Function yank-chars count
Yank @var{count} characters from cursor (yl).
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-word count
Yank @var{count} words from cursor (yw).
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-line count
Yank current line and @var{count}-1 lines below (yy).
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-to-line-end
Yank from cursor to end of line (y$).
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-register-get
Get content of the yank register.
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-register-set text
Set yank register to @var{text}.
@end deffn

@section Paste Operations

@deffn Function paste-after count
Paste after cursor @var{count} times (p).
@end deffn

@deffn Function paste-before count
Paste before cursor @var{count} times (P).
@end deffn

@section Change Operations

@deffn Function change-word count
Change @var{count} words from cursor (cw).
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-line count
Change current line and @var{count}-1 lines below (cc).
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-to-line-end
Change from cursor to end of line (c$).
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Search
@chapter Editor API --- Search

@cindex search
@cindex incremental search

@deffn Function search-forward pattern
Search forward for @var{pattern}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-backward pattern
Search backward for @var{pattern}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-next
Move to next search match.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-previous
Move to previous search match.
@end deffn

@deffn Function word-under-cursor-next
Find next occurrence of word under cursor.
@end deffn

@deffn Function word-under-cursor-previous
Find previous occurrence of word under cursor.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-pattern-get
Return current search pattern.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-direction-get
Return search direction (@code{"forward"} or @code{"backward"}).
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-clear
Clear search highlighting.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-find-all-matches pattern
Find all matches for @var{pattern} in buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-set-highlight-ranges ranges
Set highlight ranges for search display.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-incremental-start pattern
Start incremental search with initial @var{pattern}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-incremental-update char
Add @var{char} to incremental search pattern.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-incremental-backspace
Remove last character from incremental search.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-incremental-finish
Finish incremental search and move to match.
@end deffn

@deffn Function search-incremental-cancel
Cancel incremental search.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Visual
@chapter Editor API --- Visual

@cindex visual mode
@cindex visual selection

@deffn Function visual-enter-char-mode
Enter visual character mode (v).
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-enter-line-mode
Enter visual line mode (V).
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-enter-block-mode
Enter visual block mode (C-v).
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-exit
Exit visual mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-get-selection
Return current visual selection as range.
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-update-end line column
Update visual selection end to @var{line} and @var{column}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-delete
Delete text within visual selection.
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-yank
Yank (copy) text within visual selection.
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-lowercase
Convert visual selection to lowercase.
@end deffn

@deffn Function visual-uppercase
Convert visual selection to uppercase.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Text Objects
@chapter Editor API --- Text Objects

@cindex text objects

@deffn Function delete-inner-word
Delete word inside surrounding delimiters (diw).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-around-word
Delete word and surrounding delimiters (daw).
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-inner-single-quote
Change text inside single quotes (ci').
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-around-single-quote
Change text including single quotes (ca').
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-inner-double-quote
Change text inside double quotes (ci").
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-around-double-quote
Change text including double quotes (ca").
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-inner-paren
Change text inside parentheses (ci)).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-inner-paren
Delete text inside parentheses (di)).
@end deffn

@deffn Function change-inner-brace
Change text inside braces (ci@}).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-inner-brace
Delete text inside braces (di@}).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-inner-bracket
Delete text inside brackets (di]).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-inner-angle
Delete text inside angle brackets (di>).
@end deffn

@deffn Function delete-inner-tag
Delete HTML/XML tag content (dit).
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Kill Ring
@chapter Editor API --- Kill Ring

@cindex kill ring
@cindex clipboard

@deffn Function kill-ring-save text
Add @var{text} to the kill ring.
@end deffn

@deffn Function kill-ring-yank
Return most recently killed text.
@end deffn

@deffn Function kill-ring-rotate
Rotate kill ring for cycling to next entry.
@end deffn

@deffn Function kill-ring-list
Return all entries in the kill ring.
@end deffn

@deffn Function set-kill-ring-max size
Set maximum kill ring size to @var{size}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function get-kill-ring-max
Return current maximum kill ring size.
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-pop
Replace last yanked text with previous kill ring entry.
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-pop-active
Return @code{#t} if yank-pop cycling is active.
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-pop-reset
Reset yank-pop state.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Undo/Redo
@chapter Editor API --- Undo/Redo

@cindex undo
@cindex redo

@deffn Function undo
Undo the last edit.
@end deffn

@deffn Function redo
Redo the last undone edit.
@end deffn

@deffn Function undo-history-push operation
Push an operation description to undo history.
@end deffn

@deffn Function undo-history-clear
Clear the undo history.
@end deffn

@deffn Function undo-history-count
Return number of operations in undo history.
@end deffn

@deffn Function undo-get-status
Return current undo/redo status message.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Modes
@chapter Editor API --- Modes

@cindex modes
@cindex editor mode

@deffn Function editor-mode
Return current editing mode as string.
@example
(editor-mode)  ; => "normal"
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-set-mode mode
Set editing mode to @var{mode}. Valid values: @code{"normal"}, @code{"insert"}, @code{"visual"}, @code{"command"}, @code{"mx"}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-status
Return current status message.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-set-status message
Set status line to display @var{message}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-command-line
Return current command line content.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-set-command-line command
Set command line content to @var{command}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-enter-command-mode
Switch to command mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-exit-command-mode
Exit command mode and return to normal mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-exit-mx-mode
Exit M-x mode and return to normal mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-handle-space
Handle space key press (part of SPC ; M-x sequence).
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-handle-semicolon
Handle semicolon key press (completes M-x sequence).
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-handle-help-prefix
Handle @kbd{?} key press (show help).
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-execute-mx-command command
Execute M-x @var{command} by name.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-handle-window-prefix
Handle @kbd{C-x} key prefix for window commands.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Files
@chapter Editor API --- Files

@cindex file operations

@deffn Function write-file-content filename content
Write @var{content} to @var{filename}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function read-file-content filename
Read content of @var{filename} as string.
@end deffn

@deffn Function file-exists-p path
Return @code{#t} if @var{path} exists.
@end deffn

@deffn Function file-modtime path
Return modification time of @var{path} as timestamp.
@end deffn

@deffn Function file-stat path
Return file statistics (size, mtime, isFile, isDir).
@end deffn

@deffn Function file-copy source dest
Copy file from @var{source} to @var{dest}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function make-backup-file filename
Create a backup of @var{filename}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function file-remove path
Delete file at @var{path}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function file-mkdir path
Create directory at @var{path}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function read-dir path
Read directory contents as list of file objects.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Key Bindings
@chapter Editor API --- Key Bindings

@cindex key bindings

@deffn Function editor-quit
Quit the editor, optionally saving changes.
@end deffn

@deffn Function editor-execute-command-line
Execute the current command line content as a command.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Minibuffer
@chapter Editor API --- Minibuffer

@cindex minibuffer

@deffn Function minibuffer-active
Return @code{#t} if minibuffer is active.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-get
Return current minibuffer content.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-set text
Set minibuffer content to @var{text}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-clear
Clear minibuffer content.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-history
Return minibuffer history as list.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-history-add entry
Add @var{entry} to minibuffer history.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-history-previous
Navigate to previous history entry.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-history-next
Navigate to next history entry.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minibuffer-history-reset-index
Reset history navigation index.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Hooks
@chapter Editor API --- Hooks

@cindex hooks

@deffn Function add-hook hook-name callback
Add @var{callback} to hook @var{hook-name}.  The callback may be a
string function name, a symbol naming a function, or a lambda/function
value.  By default callbacks are prepended.  Pass a truthy third
argument to append.
@end deffn

@deffn Function remove-hook hook-name callback
Remove @var{callback} from hook @var{hook-name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function run-hooks hook-name
Run all callbacks registered for @var{hook-name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function hook-list hook-name
Return readable entries for @var{hook-name}.  Callable hooks are shown
as values such as @code{#<lambda>} rather than raw object strings.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Loading
@chapter Editor API --- Loading

@cindex load
@cindex provide
@cindex require
@cindex features

@deffn Function load file
Read and evaluate a T-Lisp file.  @var{file} may be absolute, relative
to the current working directory, or resolvable from @code{load-path}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function load-path-add directory
Add @var{directory} to the load path if it is not already present.
@end deffn

@deffn Function load-path-list
Return the current load path list.
@end deffn

@deffn Function provide feature
Mark @var{feature} as provided by the current file.
@end deffn

@deffn Function featurep feature
Return true when @var{feature} has been provided.
@end deffn

@deffn Function require feature @r{[}file@r{]}
Load @var{feature} if it is not already provided.  If @var{file} is
omitted, tmax searches for a file named after @var{feature}.  The call
succeeds only when evaluation provides the requested feature.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Syntax
@chapter Editor API --- Syntax Highlighting

@cindex syntax highlighting

@deffn Function syntax-set-language name
Set active language for syntax highlighting.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-get-language
Return current language name.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-highlight-enable
Enable syntax highlighting.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-highlight-disable
Disable syntax highlighting.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-highlight-toggle
Toggle syntax highlighting on/off.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-tokenize-line lineNum
Tokenize buffer line @var{lineNum} and return tokens.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-apply-highlights spans
Store highlight spans for rendering.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-clear-highlights
Clear all stored highlight spans.
@end deffn

@deffn Function syntax-highlight-line lineNum
Return highlight spans for line @var{lineNum}.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Major Modes
@chapter Editor API --- Major Modes

@cindex major modes

@deffn Function major-mode-register name extensions @r{[}syntax-language indent-increase indent-decrease@r{]}
Register a major mode named @var{name}.  @var{extensions} is a list of
file extensions; leading dots are normalized, so @code{".py"} and
@code{"py"} match the same files.
@end deffn

@deffn Function major-mode-set name
Set the current buffer's major mode to @var{name} and run its hook.
@end deffn

@deffn Function major-mode-get
Return the current buffer-local major mode name.
@end deffn

@deffn Function major-mode-list
Return list of all registered major modes.
@end deffn

@deffn Function major-mode-auto-detect
Auto-detect and activate the current buffer's major mode from
registered auto-mode rules.
@end deffn

@deffn Function auto-mode-add pattern mode @r{[}kind@r{]}
Add an auto-mode rule.  @var{kind} may be @code{"regexp"} for a
regular-expression rule; otherwise @var{pattern} is treated as an
extension.
@end deffn

@deffn Function auto-mode-list
Return registered auto-mode rules.
@end deffn

@deffn Function auto-mode-detect filename
Return the mode that would be selected for @var{filename}, or
@code{"fundamental"} when no rule matches.
@end deffn

@deffn Function major-mode-hook-add name callback
Add @var{callback} to major mode @var{name}'s hook.
@end deffn

@deffn Function major-mode-hook-run name
Run hooks for major mode @var{name}.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Minor Modes
@chapter Editor API --- Minor Modes

@cindex minor modes
@cindex global minor modes

Minor modes are buffer-local feature modes.  Active global minor modes
apply to existing buffers and future buffers unless a buffer has an
explicit local override.

@deffn Function define-minor-mode name description @r{[}lighter global@r{]}
Register a minor mode.  This low-level helper records the mode name,
description, lighter, and whether it supports global activation.  Built
in T-Lisp mode files define the user-facing commands such as
@code{line-numbers-mode} and @code{global-line-numbers-mode}.
@end deffn

Generated mode commands follow the Emacs-style argument rule used by
the built-ins: no argument toggles, @code{t} or a positive number
enables, and @code{nil}, zero, or a negative number disables.

@deffn Function minor-mode-register name description @r{[}lighter@r{]}
Register or update a minor mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-set-keymap name keymap
Associate an existing T-Lisp keymap value with a minor mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-toggle name
Toggle @var{name} for the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-set name state
Enable or disable @var{name} for the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-active-p name
Return true when @var{name} is active in the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-list-active
Return active minor mode names for the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-list-all
Return all registered minor mode names.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-lighter name
Return @var{name}'s status-line lighter.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-list-lighters
Return lighters for active minor modes in the current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function minor-mode-global-p name
Return whether @var{name} supports globalized behavior.
@end deffn

@deffn Function global-minor-mode-set name state
Enable or disable @var{name} globally.  Disabling removes global-sourced
activations while preserving explicit buffer-local re-enables.
@end deffn

@deffn Function global-minor-mode-active-p name
Return whether @var{name} is globally active.
@end deffn

@deffn Function global-minor-mode-list-active
Return active global minor mode names.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Plugins
@chapter Editor API --- Plugins

@cindex plugins
@cindex TLPA

@deffn Function plugin-list
Return list of all installed plugins.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-show name
Show details about plugin @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-install name
Install plugin @var{name} from TLPA repository.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-search query
Search for available plugins matching @var{query}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-info name
Return information about plugin @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-submit name url description
Submit a new plugin to the TLPA repository.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-review-list
List plugins awaiting review.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-approve name
Approve a submitted plugin.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-reject name reason
Reject a submitted plugin with @var{reason}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function plugin-clear-submissions
Clear all plugin submissions.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Windows
@chapter Editor API --- Windows

@cindex windows
@cindex splitting

@deffn Function split-window type
Split window @code{"horizontal"} or @code{"vertical"}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-next
Switch to next window.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-prev
Switch to previous window.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-close
Close current window.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-list
Return list of all windows.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-current
Return current window index.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-count
Return total number of windows.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-resize-height delta
Resize current window height by @var{delta}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function window-resize-width delta
Resize current window width by @var{delta}.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Registers
@chapter Editor API --- Registers

@cindex registers

@deffn Function get-register name
Return content of named register @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function set-register name text
Set content of register @var{name} to @var{text}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function register-get name
Return register content (legacy alias for @code{get-register}).
@end deffn

@deffn Function register-set name text
Set register content (legacy alias for @code{set-register}).
@end deffn

@deffn Function yank-delete-store text isDelete
Store @var{text} in appropriate register based on @var{isDelete}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function register-list
Return all registers with their contents.
@end deffn

@deffn Function paste-from-register name
Paste content from register @var{name}.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- LSP
@chapter Editor API --- LSP Diagnostics

@cindex LSP
@cindex diagnostics

@deffn Function lsp-diagnostics-list
Return all LSP diagnostics for current buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function lsp-diagnostics-for-line line
Return diagnostics for @var{line}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function lsp-diagnostics-current-line
Return diagnostics for current cursor line.
@end deffn

@deffn Function lsp-diagnostics-count
Return total number of diagnostics.
@end deffn

@deffn Function lsp-diagnostics-clear
Clear all LSP diagnostics.
@end deffn

@deffn Function lsp-diagnostics-has-errors
Return @code{#t} if any error-level diagnostics exist.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Navigation
@chapter Editor API --- Navigation

@cindex navigation
@cindex word navigation
@cindex page navigation

@section Word Navigation

@deffn Function word-next
Move cursor to start of next word.
@end deffn

@deffn Function word-previous
Move cursor to start of previous word.
@end deffn

@deffn Function word-end
Move cursor to end of current word.
@end deffn

@section Line Navigation

@deffn Function line-first-column
Move cursor to first column of current line.
@end deffn

@deffn Function line-last-column
Move cursor to last column of current line.
@end deffn

@deffn Function line-first-non-blank
Move cursor to first non-blank character.
@end deffn

@deffn Function line-previous
Move cursor to previous line.
@end deffn

@deffn Function line-next
Move cursor to next line.
@end deffn

@section Jump Navigation

@deffn Function jump-to-first-line
Jump to first line of buffer (gg).
@end deffn

@deffn Function jump-to-last-line
Jump to last line of buffer (G).
@end deffn

@deffn Function jump-to-line line
Jump to @var{line} number.
@end deffn

@section Page Navigation

@deffn Function page-down
Move down one page.
@end deffn

@deffn Function page-up
Move up one page.
@end deffn

@deffn Function half-page-down
Move down half a page.
@end deffn

@deffn Function half-page-up
Move up half a page.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Count Prefix
@chapter Editor API --- Count Prefix

@cindex count prefix

@deffn Function count-get
Return current count prefix value.
@end deffn

@deffn Function count-set number
Set count prefix to @var{number}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function count-reset
Reset count prefix to 1.
@end deffn

@deffn Function count-active
Return @code{#t} if count prefix is active.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Dired
@chapter Editor API --- Dired

@cindex dired
@cindex directory editor

@deffn Function dired-format-listing entries
Format directory listing for display.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dired-insert-listing path
Insert directory listing for @var{path} into buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dired-parse-current-entry
Parse current line in dired buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dired-is-directory-p path
Return @code{#t} if @var{path} is a directory.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dired-toggle-mark
Toggle mark on current file.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dired-get-marked
Return list of marked files.
@end deffn

@deffn Function dired-refresh
Refresh dired buffer contents.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Replace
@chapter Editor API --- Replace

@cindex replace
@cindex query replace

@deffn Function replace-find-matches pattern
Find all matches for replacement @var{pattern}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function buffer-replace-range start end text
Replace text in range from @var{start} to @var{end} with @var{text}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function replace-state-init pattern
Initialize replace state with @var{pattern}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function replace-apply-current
Apply current replacement and move to next match.
@end deffn

@deffn Function replace-skip
Skip current replacement and move to next.
@end deffn

@deffn Function replace-apply-all
Apply all remaining replacements.
@end deffn

@deffn Function replace-exit
Exit replace mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function replace-show-current
Show current replacement match.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Indent
@chapter Editor API --- Indent

@cindex indentation

@deffn Function indent-calculate-column text
Calculate proper indentation for @var{text}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function indent-set-rules language rules
Set indentation rules for @var{language}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function indent-get-rules language
Return indentation rules for @var{language}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function indent-apply-line lineNum
Apply auto-indentation to line @var{lineNum}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function indent-apply-region start end
Apply auto-indentation to lines from @var{start} to @var{end}.
@end deffn

@node Editor API --- Miscellaneous
@chapter Editor API --- Miscellaneous

@cindex messages
@cindex documentation

@section Messages

@deffn Function message args...
Display @var{args} in status line and log to @code{*Messages*} buffer.
@example
(message "Hello, " name "!")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function messages-buffer
Return content of the @code{*Messages*} buffer.
@end deffn

@section Documentation

@deffn Function documentation-list
Return list of all available documentation topics.
@end deffn

@deffn Function documentation-search query
Search documentation for topics matching @var{query}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function documentation-get topic
Return content for documentation @var{topic}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function documentation-categories
Return list of documentation categories.
@end deffn

@deffn Function documentation-by-category category
Return documentation topics in @var{category}.
@end deffn

@section Keymap Operations

@deffn Function keymap-set keymap key command
Set key binding in @var{keymap}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function keymap-keys keymap
Return list of all bound keys in @var{keymap}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function keymap-active
Return currently active keymap.
@end deffn

@node Testing Framework
@chapter Testing Framework

@cindex testing
@cindex assertions

T-Lisp includes a built-in testing framework for writing and running tests.

@deffn Function deftest name () body...
Define a named test.
@example
(deftest "addition works" ()
  (assert-equal 3 (+ 1 2)))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function test-run name
Run the test named @var{name}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function test-run-all
Run all registered tests. Returns @code{(passed failed total)}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function assert-true value
Assert that @var{value} is truthy.
@end deffn

@deffn Function assert-false value
Assert that @var{value} is falsy.
@end deffn

@deffn Function assert-equal expected actual
Assert that @var{expected} equals @var{actual}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function assert-not-equal expected actual
Assert that @var{expected} does not equal @var{actual}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function assert-error form
Assert that @var{form} raises an error when evaluated.
@end deffn

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
