\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename tmax.info
@settitle tmax Manual
@set VERSION 0.2.0
@set UPDATED 5 June 2026
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for tmax version @value{VERSION}, an extensible
terminal-based text editor.

Copyright @copyright{} 2024--2026 tmax contributors.

@quotation
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title tmax Manual
@subtitle An Extensible Terminal-Based Text Editor
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author tmax Contributors
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top tmax Manual

tmax is an extensible terminal-based text editor written in TypeScript,
running on the Bun runtime.  It follows the Emacs architecture: a
TypeScript core handles terminal I/O, file system operations, and buffer
management, while a built-in Lisp dialect called T-Lisp handles all
editor functionality---commands, modes, key bindings, and extensibility.

This manual describes tmax version @value{VERSION}.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What tmax is and why it exists.
* Installation::                Getting tmax running on your system.
* Daemon/Client Architecture::  The server-based editing model.
* Basic Usage::                 Starting, editing, and saving files.
* Editing Modes::               Normal, insert, visual, command, and M-x.
* Key Bindings::                Default key bindings for all modes.
* Operators and Text Objects::  Delete, yank, change, and text objects.
* Search and Replace::          Finding and replacing text.
* Kill Ring::                   Emacs-style clipboard history.
* Buffer Management::           Working with multiple buffers.
* Configuration::               Customizing tmax with init files.
* Plugin System::               Extending tmax with plugins.
* Frontends::                   TUI, Ink, and Steep frontends.
* Troubleshooting::             Common problems and their solutions.
* Command Reference::           Summary of commands and T-Lisp functions.
* Index::                       Combined concept and command index.
@end menu

@c ============================================================
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction

tmax is a terminal-based text editor designed for software developers,
system administrators, and power users who prefer keyboard-driven
terminal workflows.  It combines the extensibility of Emacs with the
modal editing efficiency of Vim.

@cindex architecture
@cindex T-Lisp
@cindex TypeScript core
The editor follows a split architecture inspired by GNU Emacs.  A
TypeScript core, running on the @uref{https://bun.sh/, Bun runtime},
handles low-level operations: terminal I/O with alternate screen buffer,
file system access, memory management, and display rendering.  All
higher-level editor functionality---commands, modes, key bindings,
and user customization---is implemented in T-Lisp, a built-in Lisp
dialect with tail-call optimization and a macro system.

@cindex zero dependencies
tmax has zero external runtime dependencies.  The only requirement is
the Bun runtime itself.

@section Key Features

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex modal editing
@cindex vim key bindings
Modal editing with Vim-style key bindings (hjkl navigation, operators,
text objects).
@item
@cindex editing modes
Five editing modes: normal, insert, visual, command, and M-x.
@item
@cindex T-Lisp interpreter
Complete T-Lisp interpreter with lexical scoping, tail-call
optimization, quasiquote macros, and a standard library of over 30
built-in functions.
@item
@cindex editor API
Comprehensive editor API with over 100 T-Lisp functions across 35 API
modules.
@item
@cindex daemon/client
Daemon/client architecture with JSON-RPC 2.0 over Unix sockets,
supporting multiple simultaneous TUI frames sharing the same buffers
and interpreter state.
@item
@cindex frontends
Interchangeable frontends: TUI (ANSI escape sequences), Ink (React), and
Steep.
@item
@cindex kill ring
Kill ring with yank-pop cycling, similar to the Emacs kill ring.
@item
@cindex help system
Built-in help system: @code{describe-key}, @code{describe-function},
and @code{apropos-command}.
@item
@cindex which-key
Which-key popup showing available bindings after prefix keys, with
M-x and buffer switching completion produced by T-Lisp using
Vertico/Orderless/Marginalia-style components.
@item
@cindex plugin system
Plugin system with a TLPA (T-Lisp Package Archive) repository.
@item
@cindex macro recording
Keyboard macro recording and playback.
@item
@cindex LSP diagnostics
LSP diagnostics integration.
@item
@cindex Messages buffer
A @code{*Messages*} buffer for editor event logging and observability.
@end itemize

@section Design Philosophy

@cindex design philosophy
tmax follows the principle of ``powerful core, extensible surface.''
The TypeScript core provides efficient, reliable low-level operations,
while T-Lisp provides unlimited customization possibilities.  This
architecture allows users to:

@itemize @bullet
@item Customize editor behavior without recompiling.
@item Create complex macros and commands in T-Lisp.
@item Share configurations as T-Lisp scripts.
@item Extend functionality through a consistent, documented API.
@end itemize

@c ============================================================
@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex installation

@section Prerequisites

@cindex Bun runtime
@cindex prerequisites
tmax requires the @uref{https://bun.sh/, Bun} JavaScript/TypeScript
runtime.  Bun provides fast startup times and native TypeScript support
without a compilation step.

Install Bun by following the instructions at
@uref{https://bun.sh/}.  On macOS and Linux, the quickest method is:

@example
curl -fsSL https://bun.sh/install | bash
@end example

@section Building from Source

@cindex building from source
@cindex git clone
Clone the repository and install dependencies:

@example
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/mekkamagnus/tmax.git
cd tmax

# Install dependencies
bun install

# Make the launcher executable
chmod +x bin/tmax bin/tmaxclient
@end example

@section Adding to Your PATH

@cindex PATH
@cindex launcher scripts
Add the @file{bin/} directory to your shell's @code{PATH} so you can
run @command{tmax} from anywhere:

@example
echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/path/to/tmax/bin"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
@end example

Replace @file{/path/to/tmax} with the actual path to your clone.

@section Verifying the Installation

@cindex verification
Confirm that tmax is working:

@example
# Check if tmax is on your PATH
which tmax

# Ping a running daemon (or just start the editor)
tmax --help

# Run the test suite
bun test
@end example

@section Development Scripts

@cindex development scripts
The following @code{bun} scripts are available in the project:

@table @code
@item bun run start
Run the editor directly (no daemon).  Accepts a filename argument.
@item bun run dev
Run the editor in development mode with auto-reload on file changes.
@item bun run tlisp
Start the standalone T-Lisp REPL.
@item bun run repl
Compatibility alias for the standalone T-Lisp REPL.
@item bun run build:tlisp
Build a standalone @command{tlisp} binary at @file{dist/tlisp}.
@item bun run daemon
Start the daemon only (no TUI frame).
@item bun run tui
Start the TUI client directly.
@item bun test
Run the full test suite.
@item bun run test:ui
Run UI tests using the tmux test harness.
@end table

@c ============================================================
@node Daemon/Client Architecture
@chapter Daemon/Client Architecture
@cindex daemon
@cindex client
@cindex server
@cindex architecture, daemon/client

tmax uses an Emacs-style daemon/client architecture.  A background
daemon process (@command{tmax --daemon}) holds all editor state:
buffers, the T-Lisp interpreter, configuration, and the kill ring.
Multiple TUI clients (``frames'') can connect to the same daemon, each
with an independent viewport but sharing the same underlying state.

@section Starting the Daemon

@cindex starting daemon
@cindex @command{tmax --daemon}
The daemon is the server process that manages all editor state.  It
listens on a Unix domain socket for JSON-RPC 2.0 requests.

@example
# Start daemon only (no TUI)
tmax --daemon
@end example

@cindex auto-daemon-start
When you run @command{tmax} without @code{--daemon}, it automatically
starts the daemon if one is not already running, then opens a TUI frame.

@example
# This auto-starts the daemon if needed
tmax myfile.txt
@end example

@section The Unified CLI

@cindex unified CLI
@cindex @command{tmax} command
The @command{tmax} command is the primary interface for both daemon and
client operations.

@table @code
@item tmax [@var{file}]
Start daemon (if not running) and open a TUI frame.  If @var{file} is
given, open it in the editor.
@item tmax --daemon
Start the daemon only, without opening a TUI frame.
@item tmax -e @var{expr}
Evaluate a T-Lisp expression on the daemon and print the result.
@item tmax --stop
Stop the running daemon.
@item tmax -t
Open a new terminal frame (this is the default behavior).
@item tmax --init-file @var{path}
Load a custom init file instead of the default
@file{~/.config/tmax/init.tlisp}.
@item tmax -h
@itemx tmax --help
Show usage information.
@end table

@section The Client CLI

@cindex @command{tmaxclient} command
@cindex client commands
The @command{tmaxclient} command provides direct access to daemon
operations without opening a TUI frame.

@table @code
@item tmaxclient @var{file}
Open @var{file} in the daemon.
@item tmaxclient --eval '@var{code}'
Evaluate T-Lisp code on the daemon.
@item tmaxclient --list-buffers
List all open buffers.
@item tmaxclient --kill-buffer @var{name}
Kill (close) a specific buffer.
@item tmaxclient --messages
Show the contents of the @code{*Messages*} buffer.
@item tmaxclient --ping
Check whether the daemon is running.
@item tmaxclient --tui
Launch the TUI client.
@item tmaxclient --insert @var{text}
Insert text at the current cursor position.
@item tmaxclient --insert-stdin
Read from standard input and insert at the cursor.
@item tmaxclient --script @var{file}
Execute a T-Lisp script file on the daemon.
@item tmaxclient --server-info
Query and display full server state.
@item tmaxclient -s @var{path}
Use a custom socket path.
@item tmaxclient -n
@itemx tmaxclient --no-wait
Open a file without waiting for the buffer to close.
@end table

@section JSON-RPC 2.0 Protocol

@cindex JSON-RPC
@cindex protocol
@cindex socket
Clients communicate with the daemon using JSON-RPC 2.0 over a Unix
domain socket.  The default socket path is
@file{/tmp/tmax-@var{UID}/server}, where @var{UID} is your user ID.

The protocol supports the following methods:

@table @code
@item ping
Health check.  Returns @code{@{"status": "running"@}}.
@item open
Open a file in the daemon.  Parameters: @code{filepath}, @code{wait}.
@item eval
Evaluate T-Lisp code.  Parameters: @code{code}.
@item insert
Insert text at the current cursor.  Parameters: @code{text}.
@item command
Execute an editor command.  Parameters: @code{command}, plus
command-specific parameters.
@item query
Query server state.  Parameters: @code{query} (e.g.,
@code{"full-state"}, @code{"messages"}).
@end table

@section Frames

@cindex frames
@cindex multi-client
@cindex Frame
Each TUI client connected to the daemon is called a @dfn{frame}.
Frames share the same buffers and T-Lisp interpreter but maintain
independent viewports, cursor positions, and scrolling state.  This
means you can have two terminal windows editing different parts of the
same file simultaneously.

@c ============================================================
@node Basic Usage
@chapter Basic Usage
@cindex basic usage

@section Starting the Editor

@cindex starting tmax
The recommended way to start tmax is through the unified CLI:

@example
# Start with a file (auto-starts daemon)
tmax myfile.txt

# Start with an empty buffer
tmax
@end example

For quick editing without the daemon:

@example
bun run start myfile.txt
@end example

@section First Steps

@cindex first steps
@cindex tutorial
When tmax starts, you are in @dfn{normal mode}.  The status line at the
bottom of the screen shows the current mode and cursor position.

@enumerate
@item
@cindex insert mode, entering
Press @kbd{i} to enter @dfn{insert mode} and start typing text.
@item
@cindex normal mode, returning to
Press @kbd{Escape} to return to normal mode.
@item
@cindex saving
@cindex @code{:w}
Press @kbd{:} to enter command mode, type @kbd{w}, and press
@kbd{Enter} to save the file.
@item
@cindex quitting
@cindex @code{:q}
Press @kbd{:} to enter command mode, type @kbd{q}, and press
@kbd{Enter} to quit.
@item
@cindex @code{:wq}
To save and quit in one step, type @kbd{:wq} and press @kbd{Enter}.
@end enumerate

@section Editing a File

@cindex editing workflow
A typical editing workflow:

@example
tmax myfile.txt    @r{Open a file}
i                  @r{Enter insert mode}
@i{type your text}
Escape             @r{Return to normal mode}
hjkl               @r{Navigate with h, j, k, l}
dd                 @r{Delete a line}
yy                 @r{Yank (copy) a line}
p                  @r{Paste after cursor}
:wq Enter          @r{Save and quit}
@end example

@section The Status Line

@cindex status line
The status line at the bottom of the terminal shows:

@itemize @bullet
@item The current editing mode (@code{NORMAL}, @code{INSERT},
@code{VISUAL}, @code{COMMAND}, or @code{M-X}).
@item The current buffer's major mode, such as @code{[python]} or
@code{[fundamental]}.
@item Active minor-mode lighters, such as @code{(Ln Fill)}.
@item The cursor position (line and column).
@item Status messages (e.g., ``Saved'', ``File not found'').
@end itemize

Daemon clients can query the same mode metadata with
@command{tmaxclient --status --json}.  The editor state includes
@code{currentMajorMode}, @code{activeMinorModes}, and
@code{activeMinorModeLighters}, so UI tests and client integrations can
verify mode behavior without scraping terminal text.

@section The @code{*Messages*} Buffer

@cindex @code{*Messages*} buffer
@cindex messages buffer
@cindex observability
tmax maintains a special buffer called @code{*Messages*} that logs
editor events: file operations, mode changes, errors, and T-Lisp
evaluation results.  This buffer is useful for debugging and for
monitoring what the editor is doing.

@example
:messages         @r{View the Messages buffer (in command mode)}
tmaxclient --messages  @r{View from the command line}
@end example

@c ============================================================
@node Editing Modes
@chapter Editing Modes
@cindex editing modes
@cindex modes

tmax has five editing modes, each with its own key bindings and
behavior.

@menu
* Normal Mode::      Navigation and commands.
* Insert Mode::      Entering text.
* Visual Mode::      Selecting text.
* Command Mode::     Vim-style ex commands.
* M-x Mode::        Execute T-Lisp functions by name.
@end menu

@node Normal Mode
@section Normal Mode
@cindex normal mode

Normal mode is the default mode when tmax starts.  In this mode,
keystrokes are interpreted as commands rather than text input.  You use
normal mode for navigation, text manipulation, and issuing editor
commands.

@cindex entering normal mode
To return to normal mode from any other mode, press @kbd{Escape}.

Normal mode supports a @dfn{count prefix}: typing a number before a
command repeats the command that many times.  For example, @kbd{3j}
moves the cursor down three lines, and @kbd{5dd} deletes five lines.

@node Insert Mode
@section Insert Mode
@cindex insert mode

Insert mode is for entering text directly into the buffer.  Characters
you type are inserted at the cursor position.

@cindex entering insert mode
@cindex @kbd{i}
Press @kbd{i} to enter insert mode from normal mode.

@cindex exiting insert mode
Press @kbd{Escape} to return to normal mode.

While in insert mode:

@table @kbd
@item Escape
Return to normal mode.
@item Backspace
Delete the character before the cursor.
@item Enter
Insert a newline.
@item Any printable character
Insert at cursor position.
@end table

@node Visual Mode
@section Visual Mode
@cindex visual mode

@cindex visual mode IS IMPLEMENTED
Visual mode allows you to select text and then operate on the selection.
tmax supports three types of visual selection:

@table @kbd
@item v
@cindex character-wise selection
Character-wise visual selection.  The selection spans from the starting
cursor position to wherever you move the cursor.
@item V
@cindex line-wise selection
Line-wise visual selection.  Entire lines are selected.
@item C-v
@cindex block-wise selection
Block-wise (rectangular) visual selection.
@end table

@cindex visual mode operations
While a visual selection is active, you can operate on it:

@table @kbd
@item d
Delete the selected text.
@item y
Yank (copy) the selected text into the kill ring.
@item u
Convert the selected text to lowercase.
@item U
Convert the selected text to uppercase.
@item Escape
Cancel the selection and return to normal mode.
@end table

@node Command Mode
@section Command Mode
@cindex command mode
@cindex ex commands
@cindex @kbd{:}

Command mode provides a command line at the bottom of the screen for
entering Vim-style ex commands.

@cindex entering command mode
Press @kbd{:} from normal mode to enter command mode.

@cindex command mode commands
@table @code
@item :w
Save the current file.
@item :q
Quit the editor.
@item :wq
Save and quit.
@item :e @var{filename}
Open a file for editing.
@end table

Press @kbd{Enter} to execute the command.  Press @kbd{Escape} to cancel.

@node M-x Mode
@section M-x Mode
@cindex M-x mode
@cindex @kbd{SPC ;}

M-x mode lets you execute T-Lisp functions by name, similar to the
Emacs @kbd{M-x} command.  Completion is owned by T-Lisp: command
candidates are matched with an Orderless-style matcher, displayed with
a Vertico-style list, and annotated with Marginalia-style metadata such
as bindings and documentation.

@cindex entering M-x mode
Press @kbd{SPC ;} (space followed by semicolon) from normal mode to
enter M-x mode.

@cindex M-x examples
Type the name of a T-Lisp function and press @kbd{Enter} to execute it.
Examples:

@table @code
@item cursor-position
Display the current cursor position.
@item editor-mode
Display the current editing mode.
@item quit
Quit the editor.
@item eval-buffer
Evaluate the current buffer as T-Lisp code.
@item eval-init-file
Reload the init file.
@end table

Press @kbd{Escape} to cancel M-x mode without executing a command.

@c ============================================================
@node Key Bindings
@chapter Key Bindings
@cindex key bindings
@cindex keymaps

@section Normal Mode Key Bindings

@cindex normal mode key bindings

@subsection Navigation

@table @kbd
@item h
Move cursor left.
@item j
Move cursor down.
@item k
Move cursor up.
@item l
Move cursor right.
@item w
Move to the beginning of the next word.
@item b
Move to the beginning of the previous word.
@item e
Move to the end of the current word.
@item 0
Move to the beginning of the line.
@item $
Move to the end of the line.
@item gg
Move to the top of the file.
@item G
Move to the bottom of the file.
@end table

@subsection Mode Switching

@table @kbd
@item i
Enter insert mode.
@item v
Enter character-wise visual mode.
@item V
Enter line-wise visual mode.
@item C-v
Enter block-wise visual mode.
@item :
Enter command mode.
@item SPC ;
Enter M-x mode.
@end table

@subsection Editing

@table @kbd
@item dd
Delete the current line.
@item yy
Yank (copy) the current line.
@item p
Paste (put) after the cursor.
@item P
Paste (put) before the cursor.
@item x
Delete the character under the cursor.
@item dw
Delete to the end of the word.
@item cw
Change to the end of the word (delete and enter insert mode).
@item u
Undo the last change.
@item C-r
Redo the last undone change.
@end table

@subsection Search

@table @kbd
@item /
Search forward.
@item ?
Search backward.
@item n
Jump to the next search match.
@end table

@subsection Count Prefix

@cindex count prefix
@cindex numeric prefix
Most normal-mode commands accept a numeric count prefix.  Type a number
before the command to repeat it:

@table @kbd
@item 3j
Move down 3 lines.
@item 5dd
Delete 5 lines.
@item 2yy
Yank 2 lines.
@item 10G
Go to line 10.
@end table

@subsection Other

@table @kbd
@item q
Quit the editor (single-file mode, no daemon).
@end table

@section Insert Mode Key Bindings

@table @kbd
@item Escape
Return to normal mode.
@item Backspace
Delete the character before the cursor.
@item Enter
Insert a newline.
@item @var{char}
Insert the character at cursor position.
@end table

@section Visual Mode Key Bindings

@table @kbd
@item d
Delete the selected text.
@item y
Yank (copy) the selected text.
@item u
Convert selection to lowercase.
@item U
Convert selection to uppercase.
@item Escape
Cancel selection and return to normal mode.
@end table

@section Command Mode Key Bindings

@table @kbd
@item @var{text}
Enter command text.
@item Enter
Execute the command.
@item Backspace
Delete the last character.
@item Escape
Cancel and return to normal mode.
@end table

@section Custom Key Bindings

@cindex custom key bindings
@cindex @code{key-bind}
You can define custom key bindings in your init file using the
@code{key-bind} function:

@example
(key-bind "w" "(cursor-move (+ (cursor-line) 5) (cursor-column))" "normal")
(key-bind "b" "(cursor-move (- (cursor-line) 5) (cursor-column))" "normal")
@end example

The @code{key-bind} function takes three arguments:

@table @code
@item key
The key sequence to bind (a string).
@item command
The T-Lisp expression to evaluate when the key is pressed (a string).
@item mode
The mode in which the binding is active: @code{"normal"},
@code{"insert"}, @code{"visual"}, @code{"command"}, or @code{"mx"}.
@end table

@section Which-Key Popup

@cindex which-key
@cindex prefix keys
When you press a prefix key (such as @kbd{SPC} or @kbd{g}), tmax
briefly displays a popup showing all the key bindings that start with
that prefix.  This popup disappears after a configurable timeout
(default 1000 milliseconds) or when you press the next key.

@c ============================================================
@node Operators and Text Objects
@chapter Operators and Text Objects
@cindex operators
@cindex text objects

@section Operators

@cindex operators
Operators are commands that perform an action on a range of text.  tmax
supports the following operators in normal mode:

@table @kbd
@item d
@cindex delete operator
Delete operator.  Combined with a motion or text object to delete text.
Examples: @kbd{dd} (delete line), @kbd{dw} (delete word), @kbd{d$}
(delete to end of line).
@item y
@cindex yank operator
Yank (copy) operator.  Combined with a motion or text object to copy
text into the kill ring.  Examples: @kbd{yy} (yank line), @kbd{yw}
(yank word).
@item c
@cindex change operator
Change operator.  Deletes text and enters insert mode.  Examples:
@kbd{cw} (change word), @kbd{cc} (change entire line).
@end table

@section Text Objects

@cindex text objects
Text objects define structural units of text that can be used with
operators.  Text objects come in two forms: @dfn{inner} (@code{i})
which excludes surrounding whitespace and delimiters, and @dfn{around}
(@code{a}) which includes them.

@subsection Word Text Object

@table @kbd
@item diw
Delete inner word (the word under the cursor, excluding surrounding
spaces).
@item daw
Delete around word (the word plus surrounding spaces).
@end table

@subsection Quoted String Text Objects

@table @kbd
@item ci'
Change inner single-quoted string.
@item ca'
Change around single-quoted string (including the quotes).
@item ci"
Change inner double-quoted string.
@item ca"
Change around double-quoted string (including the quotes).
@end table

@subsection Parenthesis and Bracket Text Objects

@table @kbd
@item di(
@itemx di)
Delete inner parentheses (contents within parentheses).
@item ci(
@itemx ci)
Change inner parentheses.
@item di@{
@itemx di@}
Delete inner braces (contents within braces).
@item ci@{
@itemx ci@}
Change inner braces.
@item di[
@itemx di]
Delete inner brackets.
@item di<
Delete inner angle brackets.
@item dit
Delete inner HTML/XML tag.
@end table

@section Count Prefix with Operators

@cindex count prefix, operators
Operators support the numeric count prefix to multiply their effect:

@table @kbd
@item 3dd
Delete 3 lines.
@item 5dw
Delete 5 words.
@item 2yy
Yank 2 lines.
@end table

@c ============================================================
@node Search and Replace
@chapter Search and Replace
@cindex search
@cindex replace

@section Incremental Search

@cindex incremental search
@cindex @kbd{/}
@cindex @kbd{?}
@cindex @kbd{n}

tmax provides incremental search in normal mode:

@table @kbd
@item /@var{pattern}
Search forward for @var{pattern}.
@item ?@var{pattern}
Search backward for @var{pattern}.
@item n
Jump to the next match in the search direction.
@item *
Search forward for the word under the cursor.
@end table

When you press @kbd{/} or @kbd{?}, the cursor moves to the command
line.  Type your search pattern and press @kbd{Enter}.  Press
@kbd{Escape} to cancel the search.

@section Replace Operations

@cindex replace
@cindex @code{query-replace}
@cindex @code{replace-yes}

Replace operations are exposed as T-Lisp commands:

@example
@group
;; Start a query replace session
(query-replace "old" "new")

;; Replace the current match and move to next
(replace-yes)

;; Replace all matches
(replace-all)
@end group
@end example

@section Replace T-Lisp Functions

@table @code
@item (query-replace @var{find} @var{replace})
Initialize an interactive replace session.
@item (replace-yes)
Replace the current match and advance to the next one.
@item (replace-no)
Skip the current match.
@item (replace-all)
Apply all remaining replacements.
@item (replace-quit)
Exit the replace session.
@end table

The lower-level editor API also exposes @code{replace-find-matches},
@code{replace-state-init}, @code{replace-apply-current},
@code{replace-skip}, @code{replace-apply-all}, @code{replace-exit}, and
@code{replace-show-current} for T-Lisp commands that need direct control
over replace state.

@c ============================================================
@node Kill Ring
@chapter Kill Ring
@cindex kill ring
@cindex clipboard
@cindex yank

tmax implements an Emacs-style kill ring, a circular buffer that stores
multiple entries of deleted or yanked text.  This is more powerful than
a simple clipboard because you can cycle through previous deletions.

@section How the Kill Ring Works

@itemize @bullet
@item When you delete text (e.g., with @kbd{dd}, @kbd{dw}, or visual
mode @kbd{d}), the deleted text is added to the front of the kill ring.
@item When you yank with @kbd{p} or @kbd{P}, the most recent entry from
the kill ring is pasted.
@item Use @code{yank-pop} to cycle through older entries in the kill
ring.
@item The default kill ring size is 5 entries.  When the ring is full,
the oldest entry is discarded.
@end itemize

@section Kill Ring T-Lisp Functions

@table @code
@item (kill-ring-save @var{text})
Add @var{text} to the front of the kill ring.
@item (kill-ring-yank)
Return the most recent entry from the kill ring.
@item (kill-ring-rotate)
Rotate the kill ring, making the second-most-recent entry the current
one.  Use this to cycle through previous deletions.
@item (kill-ring-list)
Return a list of all entries currently in the kill ring.
@item (set-kill-ring-max @var{size})
Set the maximum number of kill ring entries.
@item (get-kill-ring-max)
Return the configured maximum kill ring size.
@end table

@section Yank-Pop

@cindex yank-pop
@cindex cycling the kill ring
After yanking text with @kbd{p} or @kbd{P}, you can cycle through the
kill ring entries by calling @code{(yank-pop)}.  Each invocation
replaces the just-yanked text with the next older entry from the kill
ring.

@example
;; After pressing p to yank, cycle to the previous kill:
M-x yank-pop
@end example

@c ============================================================
@node Buffer Management
@chapter Buffer Management
@cindex buffers
@cindex buffer management

tmax supports multiple buffers simultaneously.  Each buffer holds the
contents of a file (or scratch text) and maintains its own cursor
position.

@section Opening Buffers

@cindex opening buffers
@cindex @code{:e}

Use command mode to open files into new buffers:

@example
:e otherfile.txt
@end example

Alternatively, use the T-Lisp API:

@example
(buffer-create "scratch")
(buffer-switch "otherfile.txt")
@end example

@section Switching Buffers

@cindex switching buffers
@cindex @code{buffer-switch}

Switch between open buffers using the T-Lisp API:

@example
(buffer-switch "myfile.txt")
@end example

To list all open buffers from the command line:

@example
tmaxclient --list-buffers
@end example

@section Special Buffers

@cindex special buffers
tmax creates several special buffers automatically:

@table @code
@item *Messages*
A log of editor events, T-Lisp evaluations, and status messages.
Updated continuously as you use the editor.
@item *scratch*
A scratch buffer for temporary text and T-Lisp experimentation.  Use
@code{(eval-buffer)} to evaluate its contents as T-Lisp code.
@end table

@section Buffer T-Lisp Functions

@table @code
@item (buffer-create @var{name})
Create a new empty buffer with the given name.
@item (buffer-switch @var{name})
Switch to the buffer named @var{name}.
@item (buffer-current)
Return the name of the current buffer.
@item (buffer-list)
Return a list of all open buffer names.
@item (buffer-text)
Return the full text content of the current buffer.
@item (buffer-line [@var{n}])
Return the content of line @var{n} (or the current line if @var{n} is
omitted).
@item (buffer-line-count)
Return the number of lines in the current buffer.
@item (buffer-insert @var{text})
Insert @var{text} at the current cursor position.
@item (buffer-delete @var{count})
Delete @var{count} characters starting at the cursor position.
@item (set-buffer-filename @var{filename})
Associate the current buffer with @var{filename}.
@item (buffer-modified-p)
Return whether the current buffer has unsaved edits.
@item (set-buffer-modified-p @var{flag})
Set the current buffer's modified flag.
@end table

@section Gap Buffer Implementation

@cindex gap buffer
@cindex implementation, buffer
tmax uses a @dfn{gap buffer} data structure for efficient text editing.
A gap buffer maintains a gap (empty space) at the cursor position,
making insertions and deletions at the cursor O(1) operations.  Moving
the cursor moves the gap, which is an O(n) operation where n is the
distance moved.

@c ============================================================
@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration
@cindex configuration
@cindex customization
@cindex init file

tmax is configured through T-Lisp scripts.  The primary configuration
file is @file{~/.config/tmax/init.tlisp}, which is loaded automatically
when the editor starts.

@section The Init File

@cindex init file
@cindex @file{init.tlisp}
@cindex @file{~/.config/tmax/init.tlisp}
Create or edit @file{~/.config/tmax/init.tlisp} to customize tmax.
This file is a standard T-Lisp script that runs in the editor's global
environment, so you have access to the full T-Lisp editor API.

Example init file:

@example
@group
;; ~/.config/tmax/init.tlisp

;; Custom key bindings
(key-bind "w" "(cursor-move (+ (cursor-line) 5) (cursor-column))" "normal")
(key-bind "b" "(cursor-move (- (cursor-line) 5) (cursor-column))" "normal")

;; Custom macros
(defmacro save-and-quit ()
  '(progn
     (save-buffer)
     (editor-quit)))

;; Custom commands
(defun center-cursor ()
  (let ((line-count (buffer-line-count))
        (center-line (/ line-count 2)))
    (cursor-move center-line 0)))

(key-bind "zz" "(center-cursor)" "normal")
@end group
@end example

@section Custom Init File Path

@cindex @code{--init-file}
@cindex custom init file

You can specify a custom init file on the command line:

@example
tmax --init-file ./my-config.tlisp
@end example

To disable init file loading entirely, use @file{/dev/null}:

@example
tmax --init-file /dev/null
@end example

@section Reloading Configuration

@cindex reloading configuration
@cindex @code{eval-init-file}

To reload your init file without restarting the editor:

@example
M-x eval-init-file
@end example

Or from the command line:

@example
tmax -e '(eval-init-file)'
@end example

@section Evaluating a Buffer

@cindex @code{eval-buffer}
@cindex evaluating buffer contents

You can evaluate the contents of the current buffer as T-Lisp code:

@example
M-x eval-buffer
@end example

This is particularly useful with the @code{*scratch*} buffer for
testing T-Lisp expressions interactively.

@section Init File T-Lisp Functions

@table @code
@item (init-file-path)
Return the path to the current init file.
@item (eval-init-file)
Reload and evaluate the init file.
@item (eval-buffer)
Evaluate the current buffer's text as T-Lisp code.
@end table

@section Editor Settings

@cindex editor settings
@cindex configuration variables
The editor state includes the following configurable settings:

@table @code
@item tab-size
Tab width for indentation (default: 4).
@item show-line-numbers
Whether to display line numbers (default: true).
@item word-wrap
Whether to wrap long lines (default: false).
@item max-undo-levels
Maximum number of undo levels (default: 100).
@item auto-save
Whether to automatically save changes (default: false).
@end table

@section Macro Recording and Playback

@cindex macro recording
@cindex macros, keyboard
@cindex @kbd{q}
@cindex @kbd{@var{register}}

tmax supports Vim-style keyboard macro recording:

@table @kbd
@item q@var{a}
Start recording a macro into register @var{a} (any lowercase letter or
digit).
@item q
Stop recording the macro.
@item @@@var{a}
Execute the macro stored in register @var{a}.
@item @@@@
Execute the most recently executed macro again.
@end table

Example workflow:

@example
qa        @r{Start recording into register a}
jjdd      @r{Move down two lines, delete one}
q         @r{Stop recording}
@@a       @r{Replay the macro}
@end example

@section T-Lisp Standard Library

@cindex standard library
@cindex built-in functions
The T-Lisp interpreter includes a standard library of built-in functions.
These are available in the global environment without any imports.

@subsection Arithmetic

@table @code
@item (+ @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Addition.  Accepts any number of arguments.
@item (- @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Subtraction.
@item (* @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Multiplication.
@item (/ @var{a} @var{b})
Division.
@item (mod @var{a} @var{b})
Modulo.
@item (abs @var{n})
Absolute value.
@item (sqrt @var{n})
Square root.
@item (expt @var{base} @var{exp})
Exponentiation.
@item (floor @var{n})
Floor.
@item (ceiling @var{n})
Ceiling.
@item (round @var{n})
Round to nearest integer.
@item (min @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Minimum.
@item (max @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Maximum.
@end table

@subsection Comparison

@table @code
@item (= @var{a} @var{b})
Numeric equality.
@item (< @var{a} @var{b})
Less than.
@item (> @var{a} @var{b})
Greater than.
@item (eq @var{a} @var{b})
Identity/equality test.
@end table

@subsection List Operations

@table @code
@item (cons @var{a} @var{b})
Construct a pair.
@item (car @var{list})
First element of a list.
@item (cdr @var{list})
Rest of a list.
@item (list @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Create a list from arguments.
@item (append @var{list1} @var{list2})
Concatenate two lists.
@item (reverse @var{list})
Reverse a list.
@item (nth @var{n} @var{list})
Return the @var{n}th element of @var{list} (zero-indexed).
@item (last @var{list})
Return the last element of @var{list}.
@item (member @var{item} @var{list})
Return the sublist starting at @var{item}, or nil if not found.
@item (length @var{seq})
Return the length of a list or string.
@end table

@subsection String Operations

@table @code
@item (substring @var{str} @var{start} @var{end})
Extract a substring.
@item (string-append @var{a} @var{b} @dots{})
Concatenate strings.
@item (string= @var{a} @var{b})
String equality.
@item (string< @var{a} @var{b})
String less-than (lexicographic).
@item (string> @var{a} @var{b})
String greater-than (lexicographic).
@item (string-upcase @var{str})
Convert to uppercase.
@item (string-downcase @var{str})
Convert to lowercase.
@end table

@subsection Predicates

@table @code
@item (null @var{x})
True if @var{x} is nil.
@item (atom @var{x})
True if @var{x} is not a pair/list.
@item (numberp @var{x})
True if @var{x} is a number.
@item (stringp @var{x})
True if @var{x} is a string.
@item (symbolp @var{x})
True if @var{x} is a symbol.
@item (listp @var{x})
True if @var{x} is a list.
@item (functionp @var{x})
True if @var{x} is a function.
@item (zerop @var{n})
True if @var{n} is zero.
@item (evenp @var{n})
True if @var{n} is even.
@item (oddp @var{n})
True if @var{n} is odd.
@item (not @var{x})
Logical negation.
@end table

@subsection Special Forms

@table @code
@item (quote @var{x})
@cindex @code{quote}
Return @var{x} unevaluated.  Abbreviated as @code{'x}.
@item (if @var{cond} @var{then} @var{else})
@cindex @code{if}
Conditional expression.
@item (let ((@var{var1} @var{val1}) @dots{}) @var{body})
@cindex @code{let}
Local variable bindings.
@item (lambda (@var{params}) @var{body})
@cindex @code{lambda}
Anonymous function.
@item (defun @var{name} (@var{params}) @var{body})
@cindex @code{defun}
Define a named function.
@item (defmacro @var{name} (@var{params}) @var{body})
@cindex @code{defmacro}
Define a macro.
@item (progn @var{expr1} @var{expr2} @dots{})
@cindex @code{progn}
Evaluate expressions sequentially, return the last result.
@item (cond (@var{test1} @var{expr1}) (@var{test2} @var{expr2}) @dots{})
@cindex @code{cond}
Multi-branch conditional.
@end table

@subsection Quasiquote

@table @code
@item `@var{template}
@cindex quasiquote
Quasiquote: construct a list template, evaluating only unquoted parts.
@item ,@var{expr}
@cindex unquote
Unquote: evaluate @var{expr} inside a quasiquote.
@item @code{,@@@var{expr}}
@cindex unquote-splicing
Unquote-splicing: evaluate @var{expr} and splice the resulting list
into the surrounding list.
@end table

@subsection Hash Maps

@table @code
@item (hashmap @var{key1} @var{val1} @dots{})
Create a hash map from key-value pairs.
@item (hashmap-get @var{map} @var{key})
Look up a value by key.  Returns nil if not found.
@item (hashmap-set @var{map} @var{key} @var{val})
Return a new hash map with @var{key} set to @var{val}.
@item (hashmap-keys @var{map})
Return a list of all keys.
@item (hashmap-values @var{map})
Return a list of all values.
@item (hashmap-has-key? @var{map} @var{key})
Return true if @var{map} contains @var{key}.
@end table

@subsection Keymaps

@table @code
@item (defkeymap @var{name})
Define a named keymap.
@item (keymap-define-key @var{keymap} @var{key} @var{binding})
Bind @var{key} to @var{binding} in @var{keymap}.
@item (keymap-get @var{keymap} @var{key})
Look up the binding for @var{key}.
@item (keymap-lookup @var{keymap} @var{key})
Look up a key binding, following parent keymap chains.
@end table

@subsection I/O

@table @code
@item (print @var{x})
Print a value to the terminal.
@end table

@c ============================================================
@node Plugin System
@chapter Plugin System
@cindex plugins
@cindex TLPA
@cindex package archive

tmax supports a plugin system through the TLPA (T-Lisp Package Archive)
repository.  Plugins are T-Lisp scripts that extend the editor's
functionality.

@section Plugin Management

@cindex plugin management
Plugins are managed through T-Lisp functions:

@table @code
@item (plugin-list)
List all available plugins in the TLPA repository.
@item (plugin-show @var{name})
Show detailed information about a specific plugin.
@item (plugin-install @var{name})
Install a plugin from the repository.
@item (plugin-search @var{query})
Search the repository for plugins matching @var{query}.
@item (plugin-info @var{name})
Return metadata about an installed plugin.
@end table

@section Plugin Installation Directory

@cindex plugin directory
@cindex @file{~/.config/tmax/tlpa/}
Installed plugins are stored in @file{~/.config/tmax/tlpa/}.  Each
plugin is a T-Lisp file (or a directory containing a main T-Lisp file)
that is loaded into the editor's T-Lisp environment.

@section Available Plugins

The TLPA repository includes plugins such as:

@table @code
@item theme-solarized
Solarized dark color theme for tmax.
@item theme-monokai
Monokai color scheme for tmax.
@item lsp-typescript
TypeScript language server integration.
@item git-integration
Git commands and status integration.
@item file-tree
File tree sidebar for navigation.
@item example-plugin
Example plugin demonstrating the plugin API.
@end table

@section Creating Plugins

@cindex creating plugins
To create a plugin, write a T-Lisp script that defines functions, key
bindings, and commands.  Place the file in
@file{~/.config/tmax/tlpa/} or submit it to the TLPA repository.

A plugin is a standard T-Lisp file.  For example:

@example
@group
;; my-plugin.tlisp
;; A simple plugin that adds line numbering toggle

(defun toggle-line-numbers ()
  (line-numbers-mode))

(key-bind "SPC tn" "(toggle-line-numbers)" "normal")
@end group
@end example

@section Submitting Plugins

@cindex submitting plugins
Plugins can be submitted to the TLPA repository for inclusion.  Each
plugin submission includes metadata: name, description, author,
version, license, and optional homepage URL.

@c ============================================================
@node Frontends
@chapter Frontends
@cindex frontends
@cindex interchangeable frontends

tmax supports multiple interchangeable frontends.  All frontends
communicate with the editor core through the same interface, and the
daemon/client architecture enables remote frontends via JSON-RPC over
Unix sockets.

@section TUI Frontend (Default)

@cindex TUI frontend
@cindex ANSI terminal
@cindex terminal frontend
The default frontend is a TUI (Terminal User Interface) client that
renders directly using ANSI escape sequences.  It requires no external
frameworks or dependencies.

Features:
@itemize @bullet
@item Full-screen interface with alternate screen buffer.
@item Raw mode input with proper key normalization.
@item Viewport management with scrolling for large files.
@item Status line with mode and cursor position.
@item Which-key popup overlay.
@item 200ms state polling when connected to the daemon.
@end itemize

Start the TUI frontend:

@example
tmax              @r{Auto-start daemon + TUI}
tmaxclient --tui  @r{Start TUI connected to running daemon}
bun run tui       @r{Start TUI directly}
@end example

@section Ink Frontend (React)

@cindex Ink frontend
@cindex React frontend
The Ink frontend uses the @uref{https://github.com/vadimdemedes/ink,
Ink} framework (React for the terminal) to render the editor UI as
React components.  This frontend provides a component-based architecture
for more complex UI layouts.

The Ink frontend is located in @file{src/frontend/} and uses the same
editor core API as the TUI frontend.

@section Steep Frontend

@cindex Steep frontend
The Steep frontend is an experimental native terminal frontend that
provides an alternative rendering approach.  It is under active
development.

@section Selecting a Frontend

The frontend is determined by how you launch tmax:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{tmax} and @command{tmaxclient --tui} use the TUI frontend.
@item The Ink frontend can be used through the React entry point
(@file{src/main.tsx}).
@end itemize

All frontends share the same editor core, key bindings, and T-Lisp
environment.  Switching frontends does not affect your configuration or
customization.

@c ============================================================
@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting
@cindex troubleshooting
@cindex problems
@cindex FAQ

@section The Daemon Will Not Start

@cindex daemon, won't start
If @command{tmax --daemon} fails:

@itemize @bullet
@item Check that another tmax daemon is not already running:
@example
tmaxclient --ping
@end example
@item Check for stale socket files:
@example
ls /tmp/tmax-$(id -u)/
rm -f /tmp/tmax-$(id -u)/server
@end example
@item Check that Bun is installed and on your PATH:
@example
which bun
bun --version
@end example
@end itemize

@section Key Bindings Not Working

@cindex key bindings, not working
@cindex bindings, troubleshooting
If custom key bindings from your init file are not taking effect:

@itemize @bullet
@item Check the init file for T-Lisp syntax errors:
@example
tmax --init-file /dev/null
tmax -e '(eval-init-file)'
@end example
@item Reload the init file from within the editor:
@example
M-x eval-init-file
@end example
@item Check the @code{*Messages*} buffer for error messages:
@example
tmaxclient --messages
@end example
@end itemize

@section The Editor Freezes or Does Not Respond

@cindex editor freezes
@cindex unresponsive
@itemize @bullet
@item Make sure you are not in command mode or M-x mode with a pending
input.  Press @kbd{Escape} to return to normal mode.
@item If the TUI client is disconnected from the daemon, restart it:
@example
tmaxclient --tui
@end example
@item As a last resort, stop and restart the daemon:
@example
tmax --stop
tmax
@end example
@end itemize

@section File Encoding Issues

@cindex encoding
@cindex UTF-8
tmax reads and writes files using UTF-8 encoding.  If you encounter
encoding issues, verify that your terminal is configured for UTF-8:

@example
echo $LANG
@r{Should contain "UTF-8"}
@end example

@section Init File Errors

@cindex init file errors
If the init file contains errors, tmax will log them to the
@code{*Messages*} buffer but will still start.  Check the messages:

@example
tmaxclient --messages
@end example

To skip the init file entirely:

@example
tmax --init-file /dev/null
@end example

@section Getting Help

@cindex help
@cindex @code{describe-key}
@cindex @code{describe-function}
@cindex @code{apropos-command}

tmax includes a built-in help system:

@table @code
@item (describe-key @var{key})
Show documentation for the command bound to @var{key}.
@item (describe-function @var{name})
Show documentation for the T-Lisp function @var{name}.
@item (apropos-command @var{pattern})
List all commands matching @var{pattern}.
@end table

Access these through M-x mode:

@example
SPC ; describe-key Enter
SPC ; describe-function Enter
SPC ; apropos-command Enter
@end example

@c ============================================================
@node Command Reference
@chapter Command Reference
@cindex command reference
@cindex reference

This chapter provides a brief summary of available commands.  For full
documentation of each function, use the built-in help system
(@pxref{Troubleshooting}).

@section Editor API Categories

@cindex API categories
The T-Lisp editor API is organized into the following modules:

@table @code
@item Buffer Operations (@file{buffer-ops})
Create, switch, query, and manipulate buffers.
@item Cursor Operations (@file{cursor-ops})
Move and query the cursor position.
@item Mode Operations (@file{mode-ops})
Get and set the editor mode.
@item File Operations (@file{file-ops})
Read and write files.
@item Bindings Operations (@file{bindings-ops})
Query and manage key bindings.
@item Word Operations (@file{word-ops})
Word-level navigation and manipulation.
@item Line Operations (@file{line-ops})
Line-level operations.
@item Delete Operations (@file{delete-ops})
Delete text and manage the delete register.
@item Yank Operations (@file{yank-ops})
Yank text and manage the yank register.
@item Change Operations (@file{change-ops})
Change (replace) text.
@item Undo/Redo Operations (@file{undo-redo-ops})
Undo and redo editing changes.
@item Count Operations (@file{count-ops})
Numeric count prefix for commands.
@item Visual Operations (@file{visual-ops})
Visual mode selection management.
@item Text Objects (@file{text-objects-ops})
Structural text objects (word, quotes, brackets).
@item Search Operations (@file{search-ops})
Forward and backward text search.
@item Replace Operations (@file{replace-ops})
Find and replace functionality.
@item Kill Ring (@file{kill-ring})
Emacs-style kill ring management.
@item Yank Pop (@file{yank-pop-ops})
Cycle through kill ring entries.
@item Jump Operations (@file{jump-ops})
Jump to specific positions (top, bottom, line number).
@item Module Operations (@file{module-ops})
Module registry introspection: loaded modules, exports, lookup, and
module descriptions.
@item LSP Diagnostics (@file{lsp-diagnostics})
Language server protocol diagnostics.
@item Plugin Operations (@file{plugin-ops})
Plugin discovery and management.
@item Documentation (@file{documentation})
Help system and documentation lookup.
@item Hook Operations (@file{hook-ops})
Event hooks for editor extensibility.
@item Syntax Operations (@file{syntax-ops})
Syntax highlighting and analysis.
@item Indent Operations (@file{indent-ops})
Automatic indentation.
@item Major Mode Operations (@file{major-mode-ops})
Major mode management.
@item Dired Operations (@file{dired-ops})
Directory editor functionality.
@item Evil Integration (@file{evil-integration})
Vim-emulation compatibility layer.
@item Window Operations (@file{window-ops})
Window layout management.
@item Editor State (@file{editor-state})
Query and modify editor state.
@item Text Utilities (@file{text-utils})
Text manipulation utilities.
@item Keymap Operations (@file{keymap-ops})
T-Lisp keymap management.
@item Macro Recording (@file{macro-recording})
Keyboard macro recording and playback.
@item Macro Persistence (@file{macro-persistence})
Save and load macros to/from files.
@end table

@section Cursor Functions

@table @code
@item (cursor-position)
Return the cursor position as a list @code{(@var{line} @var{column})}.
@item (cursor-move @var{line} @var{column})
Move the cursor to the specified line and column.
@item (cursor-line)
Return the current line number (zero-indexed).
@item (cursor-column)
Return the current column number (zero-indexed).
@end table

@section Mode Functions

@table @code
@item (editor-mode)
Return the current editor mode as a string.
@item (editor-set-mode @var{mode})
Set the editor mode.  @var{mode} must be one of:
@code{"normal"}, @code{"insert"}, @code{"visual"},
@code{"command"}, or @code{"mx"}.
@item (editor-status)
Return the current status message.
@item (editor-set-status @var{message})
Set the status line message.
@item (editor-quit)
Quit the editor.
@end table

@section File Functions

@table @code
@item (read-file-content @var{filename})
Read and return the contents of @var{filename}.
@item (write-file-content @var{filename} @var{content})
Write @var{content} to @var{filename}.
@end table

@section LSP Diagnostics Functions

@table @code
@item (lsp-diagnostics-list)
List all current LSP diagnostics.
@item (lsp-diagnostics-for-line @var{line})
Return diagnostics for the specified line.
@item (lsp-diagnostics-current-line)
Return diagnostics for the current cursor line.
@item (lsp-diagnostics-count)
Return diagnostic counts by severity.
@item (lsp-diagnostics-clear)
Clear all diagnostics.
@item (lsp-diagnostics-has-errors)
Return true if there are any error-level diagnostics.
@end table

@section Hook Functions

@table @code
@item (add-hook @var{hook-name} @var{function})
Add @var{function} to the named hook.
@item (remove-hook @var{hook-name} @var{function})
Remove @var{function} from the named hook.
@item (run-hooks @var{hook-name})
Execute all functions attached to the named hook.
@end table

@section Testing Framework

@cindex testing framework
@cindex T-Lisp testing
The T-Lisp interpreter includes a built-in testing framework:

@table @code
@item (deftest @var{name} () @var{body})
Define a named test.
@item (test-run @var{name})
Run a specific test.
@item (test-run-all)
Run all defined tests.
@item (assert-true @var{expr})
Assert that @var{expr} is true.
@item (assert-false @var{expr})
Assert that @var{expr} is false.
@item (assert-equal @var{expected} @var{actual})
Assert equality.
@item (assert-not-equal @var{a} @var{b})
Assert inequality.
@item (assert-error @var{expr})
Assert that @var{expr} throws an error.
@item (defvar @var{name} @var{value})
Define a test variable.
@item (set! @var{name} @var{value})
Mutate a variable (only in test context).
@item (deftest-suite @var{name} () @var{body})
Define a test suite.
@end table

@section T-Lisp REPL

@cindex REPL
@cindex interactive evaluation
The standalone @command{tlisp} CLI provides a REPL, one-shot
evaluation, script execution, and a Bun-compiled binary target.  It
uses the same interpreter as the editor with a standalone runtime
profile for stdout/stdin, filesystem, process, and module-loading
primitives.

@example
bun run tlisp
bun run tlisp -- -e '(+ 1 2)'
bin/tlisp script.tlisp
bun run build:tlisp
./dist/tlisp -e '(+ 1 2)'
@end example

The REPL keeps definitions across inputs, supports multiline forms, and
provides @code{*1}, @code{*2}, and @code{*3} for recent results plus
@code{*e} for the last error:

@example
@group
tlisp> (+ 1 2 3)
6
tlisp> (car '(1 2 3))
1
tlisp> (string-append "hello" " " "world")
"hello world"
tlisp> (defun square (n) (* n n))
tlisp> (square 7)
49
@end group
@end example

For the complete T-Lisp language and API reference, see the
@cite{T-Lisp Reference Manual} (@file{tlisp.info}).

@c ============================================================
@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
